THE FF7 BATTLE MECHANICS v0.8
======================== ====

by Terence Fergusson <tf_faq@dsl.pipex.com>

Final Fantasy 7 Copyright 1997, 1998 Square Co., Ltd.  Final Fantasy and
Squaresoft are registered trademarks of Square Co., Ltd.

This document is entirely my work, and was written and is owned by me,
Terence Fergusson.  All copyrights and trademarks are acknowledged where not
specifically mentioned.  If you wish to reproduce this document AS IS, you
may do so without having to ask for my permission, providing that the entire
document including this copyright notice is left intact, and preferably in
ASCII text format.

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------
VERSION HISTORY
---------------

v0.8 : 23/03/02 : Original Release - Not accompanied by sister guides


-----------------------------------------------------------------------------
FOREWORD
--------

These guides have been a long time in the making.

It started with a webpage.  Just a small private one that I created early
in April 1999.  It was more practice than anything else, and I put up most
of my findings about the game at that time.  Most of it was incorrect, but I
had some basics down.

I changed to pure text format soon after when I realised that a webpage was
very difficult to update with the number of tables such a Mechanics document
requires.  Pure text is also a lot easier to simply add stuff to.  Updates
can be made in seconds.

But this was still a private thing.  It's been private for years, in fact.
But that's not to say it wasn't added to or the information wasn't utilised.

During this time, I've met many people who share the same fascination that I
have with this subject.  We've helped each other too; some of the
information included here is due to information that was pointed out to me
in the memory dumps.  I've learned from it, I've progressed.  And the guide
grew.


Recently, it's become more and more apparent that this kind of information is
not only useful, but also in demand.  True, it doesn't help the average
player, whose only concern is to get from A to B without too much trouble and
just having fun along the way... but to others, it's fun to learn how the
game works, and exactly what makes the monsters they fight tick.

As such, I have finally managed to complete this to my satisfaction.  It may
not be finished yet, and I may not ever find the time to update it so that it
is complete... but at least it is whole.

And this is it.



NOTE (23/03/0003): This isn't a finished product.  It may never be a finished
product.  As it stands, only this guide of the three planned is being
released.  Please do not e-mail asking on the progress of the other two; the
Battle Mechanics guide is being released now as something to work on.  The
other two will follow when they're structurally complete, and not before.


-----------------------------------------------------------------------------
COMPONENT GUIDES
----------------

The FF7 Game Mechanics Guides are split into three files.  This guide, the
first, will detail the basic formulas, terms and statuses used in battle.
The other two are:

  The FF7 Party Mechanics:
    Covers the various battle formulas relating to the party, notably
  formulas regarding spell damage, materia use, and limit breaks.

  The FF7 Enemy Mechanics:
    A list of enemies focusing on their attacks and attributes, and how the
  damage from those attacks are factored into the battle mechanics formulas.


The FF7 Battle Mechanics is the main one to start with, since it will define
many terms that will be used in both Party and Enemy Mechanics.

Note that this guide is based on the PC version.  While most alleged
gameplay differences between the PC and PSX versions have been proven false,
more may exist.


NOTE (23/03/0003): Only the Battle Mechanics Guide has been released as of
this point.  The other two will follow when they are done, which may not be
soon.  Please don't hold your breath waiting for them.


-----------------------------------------------------------------------------
CONTENTS
--------

1.  Definitions
1.1   Character Stats
1.2   Special Term Definitions
1.2.1   Basic Terms
1.2.2   Types of Attack
1.2.3   Target Types
1.2.4   Equipment Modifiers
2.  Basic Damage Formulae
3.  Battle Damage
4.  Statuses
4.1   Status Attributes
4.2   Special Notes On Statuses
5.  Game Over
6.  Credits


-----------------------------------------------------------------------------
1. DEFINITIONS
--------------

---  ---------------
1.1  Character Stats
---  ---------------
There are seven Primary Stats and seven Derived Stats that make up your
basic character.  The Primary Stats are:
  Str: Strength           Dex: Dexterity
  Vit: Vitality           Mag: Magic
  Spr: Spirit             Lck: Luck
  Lvl: Level

The Derived Stats are:
  Atk: Attack             At%: Attack%
  Def: Defense            Df%: Defense%
  MAt: Magic atk          MDf: Magic def
  MD%: Magic def%


The Primary Stats dictate the overall strengths of your character.  Level
dictates exactly how powerful the character is, while the last six stats
round off the character.  Each character has a starting value for their
Primary Stats, and every level, there is a chance that these stats will
be raised by a random number of points.  In addition, it's possible to
further raise these stats permenantly using Sources.


The Derived Stats are based from your Primary Stats and your currently worn
equipment.  They are derived as such:
  Atk = Str + Weapon Attack Bonus
  At% = Weapon Attack% Bonus
  Def = Vit + Armour Defense Bonus
  Df% = (Dexterity / 4) + Armour Defense% Bonus
  MAt = Magic
  MDf = Spirit + Armour MDefense Bonus
  MD% = Armour MDefense% Bonus


Your Derived Stats, along with a few of the Primary Stats (mostly Level and
Luck), are what's used in every battle to determine battle damage, spell
strength, and so on.

NOTE!  There is a bug in FF7 such that Armour MDefense Bonus is *not* added
to Magic Def.  This is reflected in many places, including the Status screen
(but the bonus you are supposed to get is visible in the Equip screen).  To
my knowledge, it is definitely evident in both the PC version and the PSX
version.  You will take the same amount of magic damage regardless of your
Armour's MDefense rating.


In addition to the above, many pieces of armour, weaponry and accessories
will give you special bonuses to your Primary Stats which, in turn, affect
your Derived Stats.  You can only see these bonuses in effect on the Status
screen though, not on the Equip screen.  These bonuses are factored into
battle, however.


From now on, the three letter abbreviations next to each Stat will be used
instead of their full names.



---  ------------------------
1.2  Special Term Definitions
---  ------------------------
The following terms will be used throughout the Game Mechanics guides.

1.2.1 Basic Terms
----- -----------
Base Damage:
  This is a special term which means the basic power of most basic types of
attack.  For physical attacks, Base Damage is dependent on Atk and Lvl.  For
magical attacks, it is dependent on MAt and Lvl.  Most attacks will use Base
Damage to determine the damage they do.  In ability formulas, this will be
listed as Base.


NRV:
  Short for No Random Variation, this means that the attack will not vary in
power according to a random factor.


Caster:
  The character that used the ability.  Also known as the source of the
attack's effect.


Target:
  The character that is affected by the ability.


BD Modifier:
  This term applied to quite a number of abilities.  The primary use for
BD Modifiers is for Ultimate Weapons.  In this case, the name which has been
given to them is UW Modifier.  As of writing, only one BD Modifier is known
that is not connected to Ultimate Weapons, but the distinction, however slim,
still stands.  All BD Modifiers take the form of a fraction with a
denominator of 16.  (For example: 3/16)  See below for details.
  BD stands for Before Defense, in case you were wondering.


UW Modifier:
  A subset of BD Modifiers.  UW Modifiers are for Ultimate Weapons only.
They are seperated for clarity.  Take note that UW Modifiers are only applied
to Base Command skills, which are defined as: Attack, 2x-Cut, 4x-Cut,
Slash-All, Mug, Morph and D. blow.


Added Damage Effect:
  This term applies to certain weapons and abilities.  It is a modifier that
is multiplied to the damage during damage calculations.  See below for
details.


Element:
  Some attacks will use a special Element that will determine certain
factors about the attack.  Most enemies will have certain elemental
weaknesses and strength; this factor will determine whether the attack will
do extra damage or be defended against.  For example, an attack described as
a 'Elm: Fire' attack will do Fire Elemental damage.
  Note that FF7 uses the following common Elements:
    Fire, Ice, Lightning, Earth, Poison, Gravity, Water, Wind, Holy,
    Restorative.
  The absence of any Element is termed Non-Element, which, while not
technically an element in itself, will be used to denote this state.
  Also note that there are five more Elements that apply only to Physical
Attacks.  While FF7 is aware of them, they are not normally utilised in
Elemental calculations because almost nothing is weak or defends against
them:
    Cut, Hit, Punch, Shoot, Shout.
  And finally, there is a 16th Hidden Element that was obviously supposed to
have been dummied out, but due to sloppy coding, has ended up having
unexpected effects with the Elemental Materia and certain attacks.
  Of the above Elements, Restorative, Cut, Hit, Punch, Shoot, Shout and
Hidden are not made known to the player.  They can be described as follows:

  Restorative :- See below for the definition of Restore.  Restorative is the
    difference between the Cure and Life series of spells which give back HP,
    and the Holy Elemental attack spells like Alexander, which cause Holy
    Element damage.  While Undead are often said to be Weak to Holy, they
    *Absorb* Restorative instead.
  Cut :- Used to describe an attack that uses an edged weapon.
  Hit :- Used to describe an attack that uses a blunt weapon.
  Punch :- Used to describe an attack that uses a piercing weapon.
  Shoot :- Used to describe attacks that use projectile weapons.
  Shout :- Used to describe attacks that are sonic or energy-based in nature.
  Hidden :- Unknown.  Unlike the others, Hidden is the name I've given it.
            Very few attacks have this element.  Any that do can be protected
            from by linking any non-Element Materia with the Elemental
            Materia in a character's armour.


1.2.2  Types of Attack
-----  ---------------
When an attack type is given, the following terms will be used to describe
them.  These are the most common terms; unique terms will be described
within the notes for the appropriate ability itself.


Physical:
  Any attack termed as Physical will use Att and Def as the primary damage
calculating stats, and is affected by Barrier.  It will also normally use the
Physical Formula for Base Damage, unless noted otherwise.


Magical:
  Any attack termed as Magical will use MAt and MDf as the primary damage
calculating stats, and is affected by MBarrier.  It will also normally use
the Magical Formula for Base Damage, unless noted otherwise.


Piercing:
  This means that the attack will ignore the target's Defense and Magic def
stats when determining how much damage it will do to them.


Attack:
  Any attack with this modifier will cause damage to some stat.  By default,
this is HP, but this can be modified.  For example, MP Attack would mean an
ability that reduces the target's MP.


Absorb:
  The same as Attack, except that the caster benefits in some way from the
damage given to the target.  Unless otherwise noted, the benefit is equal and
opposite to the damage dealt to the target.


LR:
  Short for Long Range, this means that the ability will not factor Back Row
modifiers into the formula.  Thus, the ability will do full damage no matter
what the distance.  This also means that the ability can target enemies that
are 'Can't reach'.


Restore:
  Restorative is a special Element that has the damage rules for Elements
reversed.  Specifically, with no Restorative affinity, targets will gain
HP or MP from this Element.  However, targets that are listed as Absorb
Restorative will alternatively take damage from this element.
  If an attack is listed as Restorative, it will replace the Attack modifier.
Restore is used just to remind that this is a healing ability;
'Elm: Restorative' will still be listed within the attack, and in all other
ways, it is classed as an Attack.


Recovery:
  A special type of attack, this ability will completely refill the target's
HP and MP.  It can function without an Element, but if it does have one, then
against any target that Absorbs the ability's Element, it will inflict Death
status instead of restoring their HP and MP.  The words 'Recovery' or 'Death'
will flash up over the target to demonstrate which is being used.


Change Status:
  This attack type attempts to change the statuses on a target.  Changes in
Status are divided into three types: Cure, Inflict or Toggle.  Cure will
remove an instance of that Status.  Inflict will attempt to give the target
that Status.  Toggle will either Inflict the Status on the target, or Cure
it if the target already has that Status.  If at any time a spell or ability
is described as Curing, Inflicting or Toggling a Status, it will also have
a number in square brackets.  This number is the relative chance of success.
(Example: [15] Inflict 'Death' is a Rating 15 chance of inflicting the Death
Status.  The exact formula is not yet known, but a rough guide is to think of
the Rating as a chance out of 64.  This approximation works well when used
against enemies of equal level to you)
  A Change Status ability, like any other attack, will be either Physical or
Magical; however, if Change Status is used, then this means that the attack
itself does no damage.  The only reason Physical or Magical is listed is for
certain enemies that may react to one or the other.
  If the chance reads [63], then the Status Chance is as near enough to 100%
as it's going to get.  I've only ever seen a [63] Rating fail once thus far,
and that was Death Dealer's Hidden One against a L99 Barret.

Misc Ability:
  Any ability that is not adequately described by the above categories falls
under this category by default.  Whatever effect the ability has will be
depicted under Notes.


1.2.3  Target Types
-----  ------------
Any ability used will often require a target to be given.  The following
shorthand will be used:

Op:  Opponent
Al:  Ally
Tar: Target (Opponent or Ally)


1 Tar:
  This means that the ability can only hit one selected target.  Normally,
this target will be selected by the player or enemy.  Multi-hit attacks that
only hit one selected target also fall under this category.


<n> Tar:
  This special variation of the above means that the ability will hit <n>
randomly selected targets in the chosen target group.  For example,
Omnislash will be listed as '15 Op', which means it will hit 15 randomly
selected targets in a selected opponent target group.


All Tar:
  This means that the ability will hit all targets within the selected
target group once each.  If this Target Type is used, the strength of the
ability must be multiplied by 2/3; that strength is then used to determine
the damage for each single target in the group.  Note that if there is only
one Target in the group, then the ability is used at full strength instead;
it's counted as a 1 Tar attack.


All Tar (NS):
  NS stands for No Split.  This means that the strength of the ability is
NOT multiplied by 2/3 when used against All Targets.  It will thus do full
damage to each and every single target in the group.


Area:
  This means that the entire battlefield is a valid target for the ability.
Both the party and the enemies will be affected.


Random:
  This means that the target will actually be a randomly selected single
target out of a valid group.  Similar to <n> Tar, except that the valid group
is what's being specified.  Random [All] specifies a single random target out
of a single target group.  Random [Area] specifies a single random target out
of all valid target groups in battle.  (Example: Random [All Tar] would allow
you to decide which target group to attack, and then a single target would be
picked randomly from that group.  Random [Area] would have no such choice,
and the single target would be picked from all targetable characters in the
battle.)


1.2.4  Equipment Modifiers
-----  -------------------
The following terms will be used as shorthand to describe various modifiers
equipment and accessories may give.

+?? <Stat>:
  This indicates that wearing the given equipment will give the indicated
bonus to the described Basic Stat.  In the Weapon List found in the FF7
Player Mechanics, there are columns already for Mag, Spr, Vit and Dex
bonuses, so bonuses for those stats given by Weapons will be found in those
columns instead.


Half/Void/Absorb <Elemental>:
  The equipment will automatically allow you to either Halve, Void or Absorb
damage from the relevant Elements.  If you have a better Elemental Defense
than the one given, it will not be affected; the better Defense automatically
takes priority.


Immune <Status>:
  Wearing this equipment will automatically make you immune to the given
Status.  Note that Immunity is really a Resist.  If you are Immune to that
Status, then it is also impossible to Cure that Status should you have it on
you.  This is best shown by wearing a Ribbon and using a Hyper outside of
battle; you will gain the 'Fury' Status, but nothing will be able to remove
that Status while you are inside battle.


Start with <Status>:
  This means that wearing the piece of equipment will make sure you begin
each battle with the named Status(es).  You cannot protect yourself from this
initial infliction.



-----------------------------------------------------------------------------
2. BASIC DAMAGE FORMULAE
------------------------

First, it is important that you are familiar with the [x] convention.
Basically, [x] is the greatest integer equal to or less than x.  Thus,
[4.5] would be 4.  This convention will be used throughout the guides, and
is very important for battle damage.  In addition, you should also be
familiar with the following convention - x ... y - which defines an integer
random number between x and y inclusive.  For example, 3 ... 8 would be a
random number out of 3, 4, 5, 6, 7 and 8.

Finally, a function Rnd is defined here, since it is also required by this
guide.  Rnd picks a random number between 0 and 1 inclusive.  It is not known
yet what precision of accuracy Rnd uses at this point.



The Base Damage formula is the most important battle formula in the game, so
it will be listed here.


The Physical Formula for Base Damage is defined as such:

  Base Damage = Att + [(Att + Lvl) / 32] * [(Att * Lvl) / 32]


The Magical Formula for Base Damage is defined likewise:

  Base Damage = 6 * (MAt + Lvl)


Note that while Att and MAt are used in the above formulas, it is possible
for FF7 abilities to be coded to use each formula with the opposite attack
stat (using MAt instead of Att in the Physical Formula, for instance).
However, this is purely academic, since no known ability has been found
within the game code that does this.



-----------------------------------------------------------------------------
3. BATTLE DAMAGE
----------------

Now that the basic terms and formulae have been covered, the basic battle
process of determining damage can be defined.  Note that certain abilities
may skip certain aspects of this procedure; for example, Mindblow will
never need to work out either Base Damage, DefMod or Random Variation,
because it is a Piercing attack with NRV, and uses a formula that doesn't
need Base.


A boolean flag named 'Negative Damage' shall be defined at this point.  The
only factor it checks at this stage is whether the attack contains the
Restorative Element.  If it does, then Negative Damage is true.  Otherwise,
it begins as false.  The purpose of this flag shall become clear later.
  
 ---

First, for most attacks, Base Damage must be worked out.  If the formula
used for the ability does not use Base, then this part may be skipped.
The Base Damage formulae are listed in the previous section, and depend on
whether the attack is Physical or Magical.

If the character is 'Small', then Base Damage must be worked out with
Att = 0.

Finally, the character's Physical Base Mod and Magical Base Mod are checked.
Hero Drinks (as an example) raise both of these by 30 each time you drink
them, to a maximum of 100.

If the attack is physical:
  Base Damage = [Base Damage * (100 + Physical Base Mod) / 100]

If the attack is magical:
  Base Damage = [Base Damage * (100 + Magical Base Mod) / 100]

 ---

Next, the formula for the attack is worked out.  This is usually either an
independent formula or a multiple of Base.  This gives us the power of the
attack.  FF7 has several formulas that it may use:
  Physical Base Damage Formula * Power of Attack
  Magical Base Damage Formula  * Power of Attack
  Percentage of Target's HP
  Percentage of Target's Max HP
  Magical Formula + Power of Attack (the Cure Formula)
  Fixed Power of Attack
  Recovery
  Special Formulas

The last in that list refers to formulas that require special variables that
aren't normally checked in battle, like for Chocobuckle, which requires the
number of times the party has escaped from battle as a defining variable.

In addition, there are many different Fixed Power formulas.  Since this is
not a hex debug document, no attempt will be made to further explain this;
the formulas used will instead be listed next to each ability in the FF7
Party Mechanics and the FF7 Enemy Mechanics.

Many abilities will have either the Non-Damaging formula or a Power of 0.
Thus, they may skip this part, since these are generally abilities that
change statuses or do other non-damage related abilities.  Element checking
may still take place though to determine success of certain abilities.


At this point: dam = [dam]

 ---

BD Modifiers are factored in now, since they're a measure of your base
damage.  Note that UW Modifiers are classified as BD Modifiers.

BD Modifiers on weapons *ONLY* take effect if the ability used is a BASE
Command skill.  These commands are: Attack, 2x-Cut, 4x-Cut, Slash-All, Mug,
Morph and D. blow.  Limit, Magic, Summon, Item and E. Skill are exempt from
this (thus, an Ultimate Weapon will not lend its added damage capability to a
Limit Break, for example).  In addition, attacks that don't use Base Damage
or use their own formula (like Throw) are also exempt from this.

The key thing is to note how two BD Modifiers are put together (this should
only be necessary when using Morph with most Ultimate Weapons, but the method
is listed here just in case).  The formula is:
  New BDM = [(BD1 * BD2 * 16) + (15 / 16)] / 16

This may seem confusing, but what we're actually doing is everytime we
multiply two BD Modifiers together, we have to round *up* to the nearest
1/16th.  For example:
  9/16 * 2/16 = 18/256 = 9/128, which rounds up to 2/16 or 1/8.

If we use the formula to check this, we get:
  New BDM = [(9/16 * 2/16 * 16) + (15 / 16)] / 16
          = [(9 * 2/16) + 15/16] / 16
          = [18/16 + 15/16] / 16
          = [33/16] / 16
          = [2 + 1/16] / 16
          = 2 / 16

By going through the BD Modifiers as above, you should eventually end up with
one final BD Modifier.  This is applied to the damage like so:
  dam = [BD Modifier * dam]

 ---

Attacks that target All Targets are granted a modification now.  If the
attack is No Split (listed as All Tar (NS)), then this section is skipped.
In addition, if there is only 1 target in the group, then this section is
skipped (it counts as if it was only used against 1 Tar instead).

Whether an ability is No Split or not depends on the formula and valid target
data for the ability in question.  Attacks that use the Physical Formula will
always split their damage (they can never have the No Split ability).
Attacks that use the Magical Formula are only No Split if they cannot be
switched between All Tar and 1 Tar.  Any ability that works with the All
Materia will thus automatically be denied No Split.  The exception here is
the Cure Formula, which always splits no matter what the valid target data.
The rest of the formulas will generally be No Split, but exceptions will be
noted.

If the attack is not No Split:
  dam = [dam * 2 / 3]

 ---

If the ability is linked to Quadra Magic and Quadra Magic works with it,
then:
  dam = [dam / 2]

This happens no matter what, unless the ability does not do any kind of
damage or healing.  (Demi and FullCure are affected as well)

 ---

Defense comes next, if warranted.  If the attack is Piercing, then this part
is ignored.  If the attack is Physical, then the target's Def stat is used;
otherwise, if the attack is Magical, the MDf stat is used.

The Defense Mod and MDefense Mod of the character is checked at this point.
This is a special battle-only stat that is modified by Hero Drinks and Dragon
Force (as examples).  Each Hero Drink raises both Mods by 30.  Each Dragon
Force raises both Mods by 50.  Neither Mod can ever exceed 100.  The two
values are applied as such:

If attack is Physical:
  DefNum = [Def * (100 + Defense Mod) / 100]

If attack is Magical:
  DefNum = [MDf * (100 + MDefense Mod) / 100]

And finally, we apply the damage reduction:
  dam = [dam * (512 - DefNum) / 512]

 ---

If the character is in 'Berserk' and the ability uses a Physical Base, then:
  dam = [dam * 1.5]

Critical Strikes and Deathblow damage are also done at this point.  If the
attack is a Critical Strike (either through luck, via the Deathblow command,
the Lucky Girl status, or any other move that has automatic Criticals), and
the ability uses a Physical Base then:
  dam = dam * 2

 ---

At this point, after Critical Strike, if the Caster is a 'Frog' and the
attack utilises Physical Base Damage, then:
  dam = [dam / 4]

 ---

MP Turbo also gets a look in at this point if the ability is compatible and
is currently paired with the requisite Materia.  Depending on the level of
the MP Turbo Materia, damage is adjusted accordingly:
  dam = [dam * (1 + (MP Turbo Level / 10))]

 ---

Back Row modifier occurs now.  If the attack is Magical or is Long Range,
then this part is ignored.  If either the Caster or the Target is in the back
row, then:
  dam = [dam / 2]

Note that the above applies even if attacking an ally or even yourself.  It
is only applied once though; you will do 1/2 rather than 1/4 damage if you
attack yourself with a non-LR physical attack while in the back row.

 ---

Barrier and MBarrier are now looked at.  If the target has Barrier and the
attack is Physical and does not have the No Barrier attribute, then:
  dam = [dam / 2]

The same goes for MBarrier; if the target has MBarrier and the attack is
Magical and does not have the No Barrier attribute, then:
  dam = [dam / 2]


Generally, only the Physical Formula, the Magical Formula and the Cure
Formula attacks are affected by Barrier and MBarrier.  The rest will usually
be No Barrier.  As always, exceptions will be noted as and when we come to
them.

 ---

Sadness is skipped if the ability is NRV, a Restore or from an Item.

If the target has the Status 'Sadness', then the damage is modified
accordingly:
  dam = dam - [dam * 79 / 256]

 ---

If the ability being used is listed as NRV, then we skip this part:

  Random Variation comes next.  Thus, the following is applied:
    dam = [dam * (15 + Rnd) / 16]

 ---

Lower bound sanity checking takes place at this point.  Thus:
  If (dam < 1) Then: dam = 1

Damage greater than 9999 is left unchanged at this point.

 ---

Added Damage Effects are now done.  These are simple integer multipliers.

Added Damage Effects on weapons, like BD Modifiers above, *ONLY* take effect
if the ability used is a BASE Command skill.  No doubling up of Yoshiyuki
with Goblin Punch, for example.

In any case, for all Added Damage Effects that must be done:
  dam = dam * Added Damage Effect

 ---

Finally, Elemental Damage and Final Status Checks takes place.  Once one
Elemental is found in the order of priority, the others will be skipped.
Note that Poison Element is special; if you're Immune to the status, then you
also count as being Immune to the element (but Asrb: Poison will always be
checked first).

Within this section, checks against Shield, Peerless and certain special
abilities of enemies are also made.  It is impossible to be sure of the order
this happens in, so no attempt will be made to integrate these checks into
the below Elemental system.  However, relative notes on the subject can be
found in the respective Status descriptions and the specific enemy attributes
this applies to.

Also, once again, any Elemental affinity the player has on their weapon is
only taken into consideration for base Command abilities.  You can't have a
Fire-element Omnislash, for example, or Throw Gravity-element Mythril Sabers.

First, check if the target Absorbs one of the Elements of the attack.  If so,
then the Negative Damage flag is toggled (if Negative Damage was true, it's
now false; and vice versa).

If the target doesn't Absorb any of the Elements, but does Void it, then:
  dam = 0

If the target doesn't Absorb or Void any of the Elements, but does Half it,
then:
  dam = [(dam + 1) / 2]

Finally, if the target hasn't Absorbed, Voided or Halved any of the Elements
already, then Weak is checked.  If the target is Weak against any of the
Elements, then:
  dam = dam * 2

 ---

After all this, only one thing remains.
  If (dam > 9999) Then: dam = 9999

If the attack does damage to MP and the target does not have the 'HP<->MP'
Materia equipped, then the sanity check is instead:
  If (dam > 999) Then: dam = 999 

The 999 'Sanity Check' is also used if the target *does* have 'HP<->MP'
equipped and the damage is dealt to HP instead of MP (the 'HP<->MP' Materia
not only reverses HP and MP, but it also reverses the max damage allowed
against that target).

 ---

The final damage has, at that point, been calculated.  All that remains is to
check the status of the Negative Damage flag.

If Negative Damage is true, then the amount 'dam' will be healed to the
target.  The type of the attack will define what exactly is healed and what
else is done with the 'dam' variable.

If Negative Damage is false, then the amount 'dam' will be used as damage
against the target's appropriate stat (usually HP).



The above sequence can be summarised as such:
  Small Check
  Base Formula
  Hero Drink Check
  BD Modifier
  All Tar Reduction
  Quadra Magic
  Defense
  Berserk / Critical Strike
  Frog Check
  MP Turbo Check
  Back Row / Long Range
  Barrier / MBarrier
  Sadness Check
  Random Variation
  Damage < 1
  Added Damage Effects
  Elemental Damage and Final Status Checks
  Damage > 9999
  Negative Damage

(Note: This order may not be 100% accurate.  There are too many combinations
of factors to test them all, and without seeing the code for the battle
algorithms, a lot of what is displayed here are educated guesses derived from
results seen.  It is presumed accurate enough for 99% of all results at this
present time though.)


-----------------------------------------------------------------------------
4. STATUSES
-----------

There are 31 major Statuses in the game, although a few of them are not shown
on the Status screen and are sometimes transparent to the user.  The statuses
available are thus:
  Death, Near-death, Sleep, Poison, Sadness, Fury, Confusion, Silence, Haste,
  Slow, Stop, Frog, Small, Slow-numb, Petrify, Regen, Barrier, MBarrier,
  Reflect, Shield, Death-sentence, Manipulate, Berserk, Peerless, Paralysed,
  Darkness, Dual, Death Force, Resist, Lucky Girl, Imprisoned.

Of those, Death Force, Resist and Lucky Girl are nearly transparent to the
player, and a few of the others (like Imprisoned) are completely invisible
save for their effect.  Several are not listed on the Status screen; these
are: Dual, Death Force, Resist, Lucky Girl and Imprisoned.

What follows is a breakdown of the statuses visual effects and gameplay
attributes.


---  -----------------
4.1  Status Attributes
---  -----------------

Death
-----
The ultimate offensive Status Attribute.  If you're successfully hit with it,
you are immediately reduced to 0 HP.  Death is also the state of having 0 HP.
You can protect from it, fortunately.  That is, you can protect yourself from
'Sudden Death', which is any attack that causes you to instantly die,
regardless of how much HP you have or how much damage the attack actually
caused.  However, if you are reduced to 0 HP by taking too much damage...
well, you can't protect against that at all.

Visuals:      Character lies down
Effects:      Character cannot Act
              Character flagged as 'Dead'
              Removes all Statuses except for 'Frog' and 'Small'
Duration:     Until cured
Protected by: 'Petrify', 'Peerless', 'Resist', Safety Bit,
              Destruct+Added Effect, Odin+Added Effect, Death Force
Cured by:     Life, Life2, Phoenix Down, Angel Whisper, Phoenix


Near-death
----------
When your character is heavily wounded, but still able to fight, they are
classed as Near-death.  They kneel down and their HP indicator turns yellow
to notify of this.  Otherwise, this Status Attribute means nothing else; it
occurs only when your HP is 25% or less of your current Max HP, and you are
not yet dead.

Visuals:      Character kneels
Effects:      None
Duration:     Until cured
Protected by: Anything that prevents HP loss
Cured by:     Anything that serves to boost your HP above 25% of Max HP


Sleep
-----
This nasty affliction is one of four temporary 'Can't Act' Status Attributes
in FF7.  Once under this Status, the character is asleep, and cannot fight
normally.  However, Sleep is easily reversed; any Physical hit is enough to
wake up a sleeping character.

Visuals:      Character kneels/has Zzz above head
Effects:      Character cannot Act
Duration:     26 units
Protected by: 'Petrify', 'Peerless', 'Resist', Ribbon, Headband,
              Seal+Added Effect, Hades+Added Effect
Cured by:     Any Physical Hit, Esuna, Remedy, White Wind, Angel Whisper


Poison
------
Any character inflicted with this Status will continually take Poison
Elemental damage throughout the battle.  It won't be purged naturally until
the battle ends.

Note: The Status Attribute Poison is different from the Element Poison.  But,
if you Void or Absorb Poison Elemental, any attack that does Poison damage
will no longer inflict the Poison Attribute.  However, you will still be
vulnerable to things like Bad Breath, which causes various Status Attributes
without causing damage.

The reverse also has effects; being Immune to the Status Attribute Poison
will mean that you are also considered Immune to the element.

Visuals:      Character kneels/flashes Green
Effects:      Chracter takes [1/32 of Max HP] of Physical Poison Elemental
                damage every 2.5 units of time (ignores Def, Barrier and is
                NRV)
Duration:     Until end of battle
Protected by: 'Petrify', 'Peerless', 'Resist', Ribbon, Poison Ring, Star
              Pendant, Fairy Ring, Poison+Added Effect, Hades+Added Effect
Cured by:     Poisona, Esuna, Remedy, White Wind, Angel Whisper, Antidote


Sadness
-------
A character inflicted with Sadness is more subdued and careful in battle.
They tend to take less damage from attacks, but they find it difficult to get
angry at anything.  Hence, the growth of their Limit Bar is severely reduced.
The Limit Bar turns blue to notify you of this condition.

Visuals:      None
Effects:      Character takes approximately 177/256x damage from most attacks
                (see Section 3: Battle Damage for details)
              Limit Bar growth halved
Duration:     Until cured
Protected by: 'Petrify', 'Peerless', 'Resist', Ribbon, Peace Ring
Cured by:     Hyper, Esuna, Remedy


Fury
----
Anyone in Fury status is more prone to rushing the enemy, and attacking them
with greater fervour.  As such, while they don't benefit from the reduced
damage of Sadness, they instead get an increase in the growth of their Limit
Bar, allowing them to pull of Limit Breaks with greater frequency.  However,
their attacks are more erratic, and miss more often.  The Limit Bar turns red
to notify you of this condition.

Visuals:      None
Effects:      Character Attack% reduced
              Limit Bar growth doubled
Duration:     Until cured
Protected by: 'Petrify', 'Peerless', 'Resist', Ribbon, Peace Ring
Cured by:     Tranquilizer, Esuna, Remedy


Confusion
---------
The pure opposite of Berserk, despite the fact that the character suffering
from Confusion doesn't have any increased damage potential.  You immediately
lose control of the character, and they will randomly attack their allies,
even themselves.  Fortunately, it's easy to cure; a single Physical hit will
take care of it.  However, a recently Confused character will always carry
out the last command they were asked to irregardless; but it will always be
against you.

Visuals:      Character continually spins in place
Effects:      Character randomly attacks allies
Duration:     Until end of battle
Protected by: 'Petrify', 'Peerless', 'Resist', Ribbon, Peace Ring,
              Contain+Added Effect, Mystify+Added Effect, Hades+Added Effect
Cured by:     Any Physical Hit, Esuna, Remedy, White Wind, Angel Whisper


Silence
-------
The power of this affliction is often underestimated.  While under its
influence, you are unable to cast any Magic, Enemy Skills or Summons.
However, your other commands are untouched.  Its usefulness lies in using it
on the enemy; many of them have attacks that would be better left sealed with
Silence.

Visuals:      Character kneels/has speech bubble over head
Effects:      Character cannot use Magic/Enemy Skills/Summons
Duration:     Until end of battle
Protected by: 'Petrify', 'Peerless', 'Resist', Ribbon, Seal+Added Effect,
              Hades+Added Effect
Cured by:     Esuna, Remedy, White Wind, Angel Whisper, Echo Screen


Haste
-----
One of the best Status Attributes, Haste has your time bar filling up twice
as fast as normal.  However, on the flip-side, all timed effects like
Slow-numb, Barrier and so forth, will run out twice as quickly.  But, the
pros far outweigh the cons in this instance.

Visuals:      Character Animation speed doubled
Effects:      Time Unit speed doubled
Duration:     Until end of battle
Protected by: 'Petrify', 'Peerless', 'Resist'
Cured by:     DeSpell


Slow
----
The complete opposite of Haste, Slow causes your time bar to fill up twice as
slow as normal.  But, it has its good side; Barrier, MBarrier, Slow-numb,
Death-sentence... all those take far longer to run out of time.

Visuals:      Character Animation speed halved
Effects:      Time Unit speed halved
Duration:     Until end of battle
Protected by: 'Petrify', 'Peerless', 'Resist', Time+Added Effect
Cured by:     DeSpell, White Wind, Angel Whisper


Stop
----
The second worst of the four temporary 'Can't Act' Status Attributes, Stop
completely shuts off the Time counter for that character.  However, on the
other hand, things like Barrier, MBarrier, Regen and so on will not count
down during this time, until Stop has worn off or it's been dispelled.

Visuals:      Character Animation speed paused
Effects:      Time Unit speed reduced to zero
              Character cannot Act
Duration:     15 units
Protected by: 'Petrify', 'Peerless', 'Resist', Contain+Added Effect,
              Time+Added EFfect, Choco/Mog+Added Effect
Cured by:     DeSpell, White Wind, Angel Whisper


Frog
----
Perhaps the worst of the transformation Statuses, Frog both reduces your
attack power, as well as preventing you from using almost all of your
Materia.  The only options available to you are Fight, Item, and if you have
it equipped, the Magic Spell 'Toad'.  You can't even perform Limit Breaks
while transformed into a frog.

Visuals:      Character is a frog!
Effects:      All Physical attacks do 1/4 of Base Damage
              Character can only use Fight (not Limit), Item (including
                W-Item) or cast Toad
Duration:     Until end of battle
Protected by: 'Petrify', 'Peerless', 'Resist', Ribbon, White Cape,
              Transform+Added Effect, Hades+Added Effect
Cured by:     Esuna, Remedy, White Wind, Angel Whisper, Toad, Maiden's Kiss,
              Impaler


Small
-----
While not as bad as Frog, this is still a terrible condition.  While Magic is
still wide open to you, every physical attack you do will have an Attack of
0; you will do 1 HP damage until modifications added after the random
variation are added.  Elemental attacks and Added Damage Effects will use the
1 HP damage as the basis for their calculations.

Visuals:      Character size is significantly reduced
Effects:      Character Attack reduced to 0
Duration:     Until end of battle
Protected by: 'Petrify', 'Peerless', 'Resist', Ribbon, White Cape,
              Transform+Added Effect, Hades+Added Effect
Cured by:     Esuna, Remedy, White Wind, Angel Whisper, Mini, Cornucopia,
              Shrivel


Slow-numb
---------
One of the banes of the beginner player, Slow-numb can easily take out a
character within moments if you're not prepared for it.  Essentially, it's a
countdown to petrify; you have 30 units of time (as shown by the counter
above the character's head) to cure them of the affliction, or end the
battle.  Otherwise, they are inflicted by the Status Petrify.

Visuals:      Character has timer above head/flashes Grey
Effects:      30-unit Timer set on character
              When Timer reaches 0, Petrify is inflicted on character
Duration:     30 units
Protected by: 'Petrify', 'Peerless', 'Resist', Ribbon, Jem Ring, Safety Bit
Cured by:     Esuna, Remedy, White Wind, Angel Whisper, Soft


Petrify
-------
Completely turned to stone, this is a very bad Status Attribute to earn.  You
can't act, and even worse, you're flagged as 'Dead'; if everyone in your
party is flagged as 'Dead', then the game is over.  However, it's easily
curable, and while Petrified, you cannot be inflicted with any other Status
Attributes, or take damage in any way at all.  However, that also means you
can't have damage healed while Petrified either.

Visuals:      Character Animation speed paused/Character coloured Grey
Effects:      Character cannot Act
              Character flagged as 'Dead'
              Voids all damage
              Prevents Status changes
Duration:     Until end of battle
Protected by: 'Peerless', 'Resist', Ribbon, Jem Ring, Safety Bit,
              Contain+Added Effect
Cured by:     Esuna, Remedy, White Wind, Angel Whisper, Soft


Regen
-----
An alternative to the standard healing spells, Regen has the potential to be
greater than any of them, for half the cost of Cure3.  However, its healing
ability takes place over time, and it heals at a rate proportional to your
current Max HP value.  In addition, it has a short duration, and it can be
DeSpelled.

Visuals:      Character flashes Orange
Effects:      Character steadily gains approximately 1/32 of their Max HP
                over each unit of time
Duration:     32 units
Protected by: 'Petrify', 'Peerless', 'Resist'
Cured by:     DeSpell


Barrier
-------
A protective Status Attribute, and the first available to you.  It halves the
damage from all Physical attacks, but it has a limited duration.  The time
left for Barrier can be checked in the Barrier gauge in the left window, next
to the character name.

Visuals:      None
Effects:      Halves all Physical damage
Duration:     30 units
Protected by: 'Petrify', 'Peerless', 'Resist'
Cured by:     DeBarrier, DeSpell


MBarrier
--------
The counterpart of Barrier, MBarrier simply halves the damage from all
Magical attacks.  Again, it only has a limited duration; the time left for
MBarrier can be checked in the MBarrier gauge in the left window, next to the
Character name.

Visuals:      None
Effects:      Halves all Magical damage
Duration:     30 units
Protected by: 'Petrify', 'Peerless', 'Resist'
Cured by:     DeBarrier, DeSpell


Reflect
-------
One of the most interesting Status Attributes, Reflect allows you to bounce
away certain spells up to a maximum of four times per casting per character.
A list of spells that cannot be reflected can be located in the next section.

Visuals:      None
Effects:      Will reflect spells up to four times back at caster, or random
                enemy if caster is an ally
              Will only reflect certain magical spells
Duration:     Until end of battle or exhausted
Protected by: 'Petrify', 'Peerless', 'Resist'
Cured by:     DeBarrier, DeSpell


Shield
------
A very powerful defensive Status Attribute, second only to Peerless.  It
voids all normal attacks, and absorbs all Elemental Magic.  However, it will
not absorb Non-Elemental damage, and also, Items seem able to breach Shield
and still cause full damage, whether they're Elemental items or not.

Visuals:      None
Effects:      Voids normal attacks
              Absorbs Elemental Magic and Physical damage
              Does not defend against Item damage or Non-Element Magic
                attacks
Duration:     17.5 units
Protected by: 'Petrify', 'Resist'
Cured by:     DeBarrier, DeSpell


Death-sentence
--------------
Under this condition, a counter positioned above the character's head begins
to count down to zero.  If it does reach zero, then the Status Death is
inflicted on the character, subject to protection from Death.

Visuals:      Character kneels/has timer above head
Effects:      60-unit Timer set on character
              When Timer reaches 0, Death is inflicted on character
Duration:     60 units
Protected by: 'Petrify', 'Peerless', 'Resist', 'Death Force', Ribbon,
              Safety Bit
Cured by:     None


Manipulate
----------
The only Status Attribute that cannot be used on your party, Manipulate is a
very useful tool.  Using it on an enemy, if they're susceptible to it, will
place the enemy under the character's command.  Note that each character can
only Manipulate one enemy at a time, and a single Physical hit will free the
enemy from your control.

Visuals:      Character flashes Cyan
Effects:      Character is controlled by whomever used Manipulate on them
Duration:     Until end of battle
Protected by: 'Petrify', 'Resist', 'Sleep', 'Stop', 'Paralysed'
Cured by:     Any Physical hit, White Wind


Berserk
-------
This is a very risky Status Attribute.  On the plus side, a character under
this Attribute hits harder than usual with every attack.  But on the minus,
they cannot be controlled, and they randomly attack the enemy any time they
can.  It is also impossible to Critical Strike when under Berserk Status.
Berserk has another use; it's an effective alternative to Silence when used
on the enemy....

Visuals:      Character flashes Red
Effects:      Character's Physical Damage is multiplied by 1.5
              Character attacks random Enemy with Physical Attack
              Impossible to get Critical Strikes
Duration:     Until end of battle
Protected by: 'Petrify', 'Peerless', 'Resist', Ribbon, Peace Ring,
              Mystify+Added Effect
Cured by:     Esuna, Remedy, White Wind, Angel Whisper


Peerless
--------
The ultimate defensive Status Attribute.  Unfortunately, only one character
has the ability to use this: Aeris.  When used, it fully voids all damage of
any type, as well as acting like Resist with regards to Status Attributes.
However, it has a limited duration, and the Void state makes it impossible to
heal while under it, but it is still a formidable Attribute.

Visuals:      Character flashes Yellow
Effects:      Voids all damage
              Immune to all Status Attributes
Duration:     17.5 units
Protected by: 'Petrify', 'Resist'
Cured by:     None


Paralysed
---------
The least powerful of the temporary 'Can't Act' Status Attributes, it's still
a pain at times.  It acts almost exactly like Sleep and while it lasts for a
very short time, you can't cure it with a simple Physical attack.

Visuals:      Character kneels/Character animation speed paused
Effects:      Character cannot Act
Duration:     8 units
Protected by: 'Petrify', 'Peerless', 'Resist', Ribbon, Jem Ring
Cured by:     Esuna, Remedy, White Wind, Angel Whisper


Darkness
--------
A nuisance at best, Darkness simply reduces your attack accuracy, causing you
to miss more often.  It's easily cured, however, and it has little tactical
use.

Visuals:      Character kneels/flashes Black
Effects:      Character Accuracy% reduced
Duration:     Until end of battle
Protected by: 'Petrify', 'Peerless', 'Resist', Ribbon, Silver Glasses,
              Fairy Ring
Cured by:     Esuna, Remedy, White Wind, Angel Whisper, Eye drop


Dual
----
This extremely rare Status only turns up during one battle; that with
Bottomswell.  Whenever Bottomswell uses Waterpolo at you, both Imprisoned and
Dual are placed on you.  Dual is dangerous however; it acts like a reverse
Regen.  HP is drained over time, requiring swift attention.

Visuals:      None
Effects:      Character steadily loses approximately 1/32 of their Max HP
                over each unit of time
Duration:     ???
Protected by: ???
Cured by:     Killing Waterpolo


Death Force
-----------
A useful status, which allows you to temporarily give yourself protection
from Death until the end of the battle.  Its usefulness stems from the fact
that very few enemies actually use the Death Status.  Recognise them, and you
can possibly spare an Accessory slot or a few Materia slots and just rely on
Death Force for protection when you need it.  Of course, the disadvantage is
that the immunity is temporary; if that character gets hit by DeSpell or
White Wind or gets killed, then they will lose the immunity immediately.

Visuals:      None
Effects:      Immune 'Death'
Duration:     Until end of battle
Protected by: ???
Cured by:     DeSpell, White Wind


Resist
------
You are never given any indication of when you have Resist, but its effects
are quickly apparent; any Status change is prevented by the power of Resist.
Unfortunately, that can also mean, for example, if you have Frog and then
Resist is placed on you, you cannot then cure Frog without removing Resist
first.  Its best use is to trap enemies with certain Status Attributes so
that they can't heal themselves.  As a secondary use, it can be used as a
temporary defense against nasty Statuses, but it's expensive, and not easy to
remove.

Visuals:      None
Effects:      Immune to all Status Attributes
Duration:     Until end of battle
Protected by: None
Cured by:     DeSpell, White Wind


Lucky Girl
----------
Only one attack in the game can inflict this Status: Lucky Girl.  This is one
of the Limit Combinations in Cait Sith's Slot Limit.  It is a somewhat useful
status, causing all subsequent attacks to be Critical Strikes.  However, this
is offset by its rarity; most players will go through the game without ever
seeing Lucky Girl.

Visuals:      None
Effects:      All attacks are automatic Critical Strikes
Duration:     ???
Protected by: ???
Cured by:     None


Imprisoned
----------
The final temporary 'Can't Act' Status.  Unfortunately, the temporary nature
of this status is dependant on what is causing it; various enemies have a few
ways of dealing out this attribute, and each requires its own method of
removing it.  In addition, the character is flagged as 'Dead'.  It is easily
the worst of the four 'Can't Act' Statuses.

Visuals:      Character Animation speed paused
Effects:      Character cannot Act
              Character flagged as 'Dead'
              Character cannot be targeted by attacks/spells
Duration:     Until end of battle
Protected by: None
Cured by:     Killing Pyramid, Waterpolo or Left Arm/Right Arm


---  -------------------------
4.2  Special Notes On Statuses
---  -------------------------

In addition to the above, the following notes must be taken into account.


Colours
-------
The different colours you flash have a priority system; if you currently have
a Status that has a higher priority than another one you have, then you will
flash the colour of the higher priority Status.  The priorities are:

 Highest Priority                                             Lowest Priority
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------------
 Slow-numb    Poison    Berserk    Peerless   Darkness    Regen    Manipulate
    GREY      GREEN       RED       YELLOW     BLACK      ORANGE      CYAN


Thus, if your character has both Darkness and Berserk on them, they'll flash
Red rather than Black, because Berserk is the more important one to know
about.  (For instance, you don't want to mistake Slow-numb for Death-sentence
just because you've got Regen on, do you?)


Status Incompatibilities
------------------------
Various statuses will cancel out other ones as soon as they're inflicted upon
a character.  The following table will demonstrate this:

Status Name   Cancels
-----------   -------
Death         All Status Attributes except Frog and Small
Sleep         Manipulate
Sadness       Fury
Fury          Sadness
Haste         Slow
Slow          Haste
Stop          Manipulate
Petrify       Slow-numb, Manipulate
Paralysed     Manipulate


Removing Conditions
-------------------
What follows are the various ways of removing multiple Status Attributes at
the same time.  Those not listed are self-explanatory (ie they tell you what
they cure.  Also, if something cures Petrify, then it also cures Slow-numb)

Note: Healing spells and effects work in strict order, first healing HP, then
removing Status Attributes from the top down.  Thus, White Wind takes two
tries to be able to remove, for example, Frog and Resist; the first time, it
can't remove Frog because of Resist.  The second try, Resist is gone, so it
can finally remove Frog.  Keep this in mind.


Status Name    Esuna  Remedy  DeBarrier  DeSpell  White Wind  Angel Whisper
-----------    -----  ------  ---------  -------  ----------  -------------
Death            -      -         -         -         -             O
Sleep            O      O         -         -         O             O
Poison           O      O         -         -         O             O
Sadness          O      O         -         -         -             -
Fury             O      O         -         -         -             -
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Confusion        O      O         -         -         O             O
Silence          O      O         -         -         O             O
Haste            -      -         -         O         -             -
Slow             -      -         -         O         O             O
Stop             -      -         -         O         O             O
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Frog             O      O         -         -         O             O
Small            O      O         -         -         O             O
Slow-numb        O      O         -         -         O             O
Petrify          O      O         -         -         O             O
Regen            -      -         -         O         -             -
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Barrier          -      -         O         O         -             -
MBarrier         -      -         O         O         -             -
Reflect          -      -         O         O         -             -
Shield           -      -         O         O         -             -
Death-sentence   -      -         -         -         -             -
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Manipulate       -      -         -         -         O             -
Berserk          O      O         -         -         O             O
Peerless         -      -         -         -         -             -
Paralysed        O      O         -         -         O             O
Darkness         O      O         -         -         O             O
Death Force      -      -         -         O         O             -
Resist           -      -         -         O         O             -


Note: Due to space constraints, it is difficult to fit any more abilities
onto the above list.  What's shown above are the most common ways of removing
multiple statuses.  The others can be summarised as such:

  Holy Torch: Cures everything DeSpell does except 'Death Force' and
              'Resist'.


Reflection
----------
Finally, the following skills can be reflected using the Status Reflect.

Magic:
  Cure, Cure2, Cure3, Poisona, Esuna, Resist, Life, Life2, Regen,
  Fire, Fire2, Fire3, Ice, Ice2, Ice3, Bolt, Bolt2, Bolt3,
  Quake, Quake2, Quake3, Bio, Bio2, Bio3, Sleepel, Confu, Silence,
  Mini, Toad, Berserk, Haste, Slow, Stop, Barrier, MBarrier, Death,
  Freeze, Break, Tornado, Flare, Wall

Enemy Skills:
  Frog Song, L4 Suicide, Magic Hammer, Death Force, Flame Thrower, Laser,
  Matra Magic, Aqualung, Shadow Flare, Pandora's Box

All Summons and Items are non-reflectable.


As a companion to this section, here are the specific Magic and Enemy Skills
that *CANNOT* be reflected.

Magic:
  Demi, Demi2, Demi3, Reflect, DeBarrier, DeSpell, Escape, Remove, Comet,
  Comet2, FullCure, Shield, Ultima

Enemy Skills:
  White Wind, Big Guard, Angel Whisper, Dragon Force, Bad Breath, Beta,
  Trine, Magic Breath, ????, Goblin Punch, Chocobuckle, L5 Death,
  Death Sentence, Roulette


-----------------------------------------------------------------------------
5. GAME OVER
------------

There are a number of ways to lose the game, most of which can only occur in
battle.

The most common way is to have all three characters in your battle party
flagged as 'Dead'.  This involves losing each of your characters to any
of the following situations:

 1. Gaining the Status 'Death'
 2. Gaining the Status 'Petrify'
 3. Gaining the Status 'Imprisoned'
     (This occurs if you are either picked up by one of Carry Armor's arms,
      or you are surrounded by Reno's Pyramid or Bottomswell's Waterpolo.
      You must destroy whatever is imprisoning the character to bring them
      back)
 4. Being knocked out of battle by Eat (used by Hungry), Goanni (used by
      Ghost Ship) or Whirlsand (used by Ruby Weapon).  Midgar Zolom's Blown
      Away, Scissors(Upper)'s Scissor Tornado and Gighee's Sun Diver all
      knock you out of battle, but flag the character as escaped instead of
      dead; so instead, if all other characters die or are knocked out, the
      battle itself will count as an escape.

If you are still flagged as 'Dead' at the end of a successful battle, then
that character will gain no EXP or AP from the battle.  However, the Status
'Death' is the only one that lasts into the next battle if you don't cure it.

You will also lose the battle in one other special case: running out of time
in the Emerald Weapon battle.  This only occurs if you do not have the
Underwater Materia equipped during that battle, however.

Note that if you lose a battle in Battle Square, the Five Gods Pagoda or Fort
Condor, you won't lose the game, just the battle.  In all other cases, losing
a battle means 'Game Over'.


Finally, if you run out of time in the Mako Reactor 1 Mission, you will
automatically lose the game, without having to be in battle.


-----------------------------------------------------------------------------
6. CREDITS
----------

A large majority of the work here is my own... but there are some people that
I feel it is necessary to mention on this long road.

The Denizens of alt.games.final-fantasy.rpg:
  My old haunt.  More a shout-out rather than credit, but hey, it's where I
began, really ^_^  It's also where I met...

Qhimm:
  ...with whom I worked on the FF8 savemap with.  Lots of fun, and we
actually got something useful out of it: a working save editor that he
programmed named Griever.
  It was also on his site that met others who took the same interest in
this field.  Which leads to....

The Denizens of Qhimm's Forum:
  The SaiNt.  Ficedula.  Alhexx.  And *especially* L.Spiro.  There were
others, of course, but those are the names who stand out.  Enemy Stats and
Attack Properties would've been hell to compile without the effort made by
those at Qhimm's Forum.  I collected data myself, but understanding it?
L.Spiro provided the first and most important step in deciphering the attack
and enemy dumps.
  

And... that's that, really.  Hope you've enjoyed the show.


-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

The FF7 Battle Mechanics, copyright 2001-2003 Terence Fergusson
